# Eoin Murray MPhil corrections changelog.

_21-06-2016_

# Caption improvements

## Figure 1.1

__Previously__

Electronic structure of a quantum dot. (a) An exciton e-h pair. (b)
A biexciton with two e-h pairs. (c) An exciton with an extra hole making a
positively charged exciton.

__Now__

Electronic structure of a quantum dot. (a) An e-h pair is referred to as an
exciton. (b) Two e-h pairs is referred to as a biexciton. (c) An exciton with an
extra hole (electron) is a positively (negatively) charged exciton.

## Figure 1.2

__Previously__

Single photon emission process in a quantum dot.

__Now__

A single photon emission process in a quantum dot. A photon ($\gamma$ in the
image) excites an electron from the Valence band to the Conduction band, this
creates an exciton. This exciton can relax into the quantum dot and after some
time $\tau$ it will recombine and emit another photon. Since the quantum dot
energy leves are discrete, and only accept a fixed number of carriers and after
photon emission there is a finite time which must pass before more carriers can
be captured, true single photon emission is possible.

## Figure 1.3

__Previously__

Light ray propagation in a planar dielectric waveguide.

__Now__

Light ray propagation in a planar dielectric waveguide. The unguided ray
impinges on the boundary at angle larger than $\theta_c$ and therefore some of
the light refracts, losing power at each reflection causing the ray to gradually
disappear. The guided ray impinges at an angle less than $\theta_c$ and reflects
fully propagating long the core without any loss of power.

## Figure 1.4

__Previously__

Graphical solution of Equation \ref{eqn:trans}. The black line is the
LHS of the equation and the red line is the RHS. Each LHS segment corresponds to
a mode in the waveguide.

__Now__

Graphical solution of to the transcendental equation \ref{eqn:trans}. The black line is the
LHS of the equation and the red line is the RHS. Each LHS segment corresponds to
a mode in the waveguide.

## Figure 1.7

__Previously__

Example NOON state sensor using a single photon source and a photonic circuit.
In this case the temperature of the heater is being sensed.

__Now__

A single photon is emitted and impinges on the 50:50 beamsplitter, where one is
delayed. The two photons will then interfere at the first DC, generating a NOON
state. The state travels down paths 1 and 2, gathering a phase due to the
presence of the heater on path 1. The phase of the MZI, and thus the temperature
of the heater, can be determined accurately from analysing how output
coincidences change with temperature.

## Figure 2.1

__Previously__

Schematic of waveguide characterisation experiment.

__Now__

Schematic of waveguide characterisation experiment. Two PM V-groove arrays are
aligned to the side  of the waveguide chip. One of the V-groove channels injects
laser light into port 1. The light is split by the DC and then collected from
port 3 and 4 by another (generally multimode) V-groove array and sent to a power
meter. The power ratios of of port 3 and 4 are used to calculate the coupling
ratio of the DC.

## Figure 2.3

__Previously__

Typical micro-Photoluminescence setup to excite the QD sample with a laser and
collect the QD light. The orange light is the laser and the red light is the
path the QD light takes.

__Now__

Typical micro-Photoluminescence setup to excite the QD sample with a laser and
collect the QD light. The orange light is the laser and the red light is the
path the QD light takes. The QD light travels in free space through two 92/8
beamsplitters, with 92\% transmission. With the two beamsplitters; the laser,
LED and CCD elements can be placed in the optical path of the QD light, while
minimising the amount of QD light lost. The QD light is collected by a  fibre
coupled collimator and sent to a spectrometer equipped with a, liquid nitrogen
cooled, silicon charged coupled device.

## Figure 2.5

__Previously__

Schematic of a hybrid device. A III-V chip with embedded quantum dots is bonded
to an SiON waveguide chip such that the single photons from the QDs are routed
through the waveguides.

__Now__

Schematic of a hybrid device. A III-V chip with embedded quantum dots is bonded
to an SiON waveguide chip such that the single photons from the QDs are routed
through the waveguides. The other end of the waveguide is bonded to a V-groove
array to collect the light and send it to a spectrometer.

## Figure 2.6

__Previously__

Schematic of HBT experiment taking place on the Hybrid chip.

__Now__

Schematic of HBT experiment taking place on the Hybrid chip. The light from
ports 1 and 2 of the hybrid chip is collected by the V-groove array and sent
towards transmission gratings in order to spectrally isolate the QD light.  The
light in both channels then impinge on APDs. The APD clicks are then correlated
on a timing card.

## Figure 3.1

__Previously__

Finite difference time domain simulation of a QD dipole emitting in a cavity and
the emission being guided by the SiON core.

__Now__

Finite difference time domain simulation of a QD dipole emitting in a cavity and
the emission being guided by the SiON core. The $\hat{z}$ component of the
electro-magnetic field is  clearly seen to propagate along the waveguide core.

## Figure 3.5

__Previously__

Photograph of an example bonded device.

__Now__

Photograph of an example bonded device. The III-V chip is bonded orthogonally to
the  SiON chip (top-right) which is in turn bonded to a six channel V-groove
array (bottom-left of chip). The nichrome channels allow a phase-varying heating
current to be applied to the MZ's. The structure is glued to a copper block is
placed in a cryostat for the duration of experiments.

## Figure 3.6

__Previously__

Schematic of the experiment.

__Now__

Schematic of the experiment. The laser light travels from port 3 (highlighted in
orange) exciting QDs in the III-V chip. The QD light (path highlighted in red)
enters a heater tuned MZI. The QD light is collected by V-grooves and sent
through transmission gratings towards APDs in order to do correlations.

## Figure 3.9

__Previously__

Counts measured as a function of time over 12 hours.

__Now__

Counts measured as a function of time over 12 hours. The hybrid chip is stable
over long periods of time and needs no drifting correction.

## Figure 3.11

__Previously__

The outputs a MZI arm is shown by the black triangles, the solid black line is a
fit to the data. The red line is the calculated phase as a function of voltage.

__Now__

The output of a MZI arm is shown by the black triangles, the solid black line is a
fit to the data. The red line is the calculated phase as a function of voltage.

# Change units of some graphs

I was to check with Toshiba the possibility that I can add more details to the
axis graphs (changing to arbitrary units to an actual count rate).I have spoken
to David Ellis and Toshiba will not allow me to include count rates.

# New references

Added original 'Quantum Dot Single-Photon Turnstile Device' citation on page 8.

Added HBT referent to experimental section documenting the HBT experiment, page 26.

Added 'Manipulation of multiphoton entanglement in waveguide quantum circuits' justification for
waveguide characterisation experiments on page 20.
